---
layout: post
title:  "Titanic"
date:   2016-01-18
categories:
tags: [class]
---
The “women and children first” imperative rang true, with majority of the
survivors being women and children. Only 20% percent of the men on board
survived, while 53% of children and 74% of women survived.

Twentieth century chivalry called for shame on the men who boarded before a
woman or child, as it was viewed as cowardly and despicable for a man to put
himself before a “more helpless” female or child.

Interestingly enough, there is hardly any indication in the statistics that
would lead me to believe that preference was given to second over third class
citizens. Second class women had a survival rate of 86%, while third class women
had a survival rate of 46%; surprisingly third class men survived at a rate
twice as high compared to that of second class men and lower than the rate of
male crew. One fact to take into consideration in this is the locations of the
passengers’ rooms. The first class passengers would have rooms higher on the
ship, while second class passengers would have most likely been accommodated in
rooms closer to the deck’s level and third class would be located below deck,
closer to where the flooding would have begun. Thus third class passengers
would have been the least likely to make it to the deck; the flooding would have
trapped many in their rooms and their crowded accommodations increased the
chance that many persons would have been trampled. Even though this lowers the
number of persons that had the chance to be loaded into a lifeboat, it does not
excuse the fact that more than twice as many first class passengers survived in
comparison to third class passengers.

Despite the disparity in survival rate what is more damning is the process of
boarding of the lifeboats. The crew relied on their own judgement to load the
lifeboats, meaning they mostly relied on social customs. Specific parts of the
deck were reserved for different classes. The first class deck contained half
the lifeboats on the ship; this is where the first boats launched – they only
contained first class passengers and some crew members to do the work, second
class passengers (regardless of gender and age) were turned away. This would
explain why the first six lifeboats to leave contained first class passengers
only. What is even worse is that these boats launched at less than half
capacity. Many third class passengers like Rhonda “Rosa” Abbott had to fight to
survive. Abbott had jumped from the titanic before it took its final plunge.
She and her two sons took the gamble of swimming to the nearest lifeboat,
unfortunately she was the only one to make it to the boat. If the crew and staff
had been better prepared to handle such an unfortunate event, it is probable
that more persons would have survived across the board.
